Yanga Xakalashe (born 16 August 1983 in East London, South Africa) is a South African rugby union player, currently playing with the . His regular position is prop. ==Career== He was a member of the side that played in the 2005 Under-21 Provincial Championship. The following season, he was included on the bench for the ' senior side for their 2006 Vodacom Cup match against . However, he failed to make an appearance in a 9–18 defeat to their Western Cape rivals. He played club rugby over the next few seasons and it wasn't until eight years later that he got another chance at provincial level; he was one of several amateur players brought into the provincial set-up at the start of 2014 after the professional side was declared bankrupt. He was included in their squad for the 2014 Vodacom Cup competition and made his debut in their first match of the season against the . He came on as a replacement ten minutes into the second half to make his first class debut, aged . He made four appearances off the bench before starting their final two matches of the competition against the and . He was also named in their squad for the 2014 Currie Cup qualification tournament, with a spot in the 2014 Currie Cup Premier Division up for grabs for the winners. His first Currie Cup start came in their Round One match against eventual winners in a 5–52 defeat. In his next match, against in East London, Xakalashe scored his first senior try, a consolation try in a 12–37 defeat. He made three more appearances, including one start in their final match against the in Potchefstroom. A 103–15 win for the home team ensured the competition ended in disastrous fashion for the Bulldogs, who lost all six their matches. He played a further five times during the 2014 Currie Cup First Division and featured in their only win of the season, a 19–18 victory over the . Xakalashe was retained for 2015, being included in the Border Bulldogs squad for the 2015 Vodacom Cup competition. ==References== Category:1983 births Category:Living people Category:Border Bulldogs players Category:Rugby union players from East London, South Africa Category:Rugby union props Category:South African rugby union players