Yasser Shamsaldin Mohamedالحكم العسكري والتطرف الديني وجهان لعملة واحدة, yasser article in sasapost. ولكم في سحرة فرعون قدوة, yasser article in sasapost. قبل ان تدعوا فلا يستجاب لكم, yasser article in اhuffpost. خمسة كتب عن الحرية يجب أن تقرأها, yasser article in اhuffpost. موقعة "الكاندوم" وألتراس أهلاوي.. نقطة تحول في مواجهة الانقلاب العسكري, yasser article in اhuffpost. Enforced disappearances Action systematically regime military ruler in Egypt, yasser article i narabsolaa Agency Press. The ugliest methods of torture in Egyptian prisons, including cutting tongues, yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. قبل ان تدعوا فلا يستجاب لكم , yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. Sisi red carpet and Minister inventor of the shoe, yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. Justice base of rule, yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. كى لا نفقد انسانيتنا, yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. خواطر خائن, yasser article i narabsolaa Agency Press. الرجل الانيق - قصة قصيرة, yasser article in narabsolaa Agency Press. تذكر انك بشر, yasser article i narabsolaa Agency Press. المخابرات وصناعة السينما, yasser article i narabsolaa Agency Press. رسالة الى الاخوان ( مغانم الثورة – ودرس غزوه احد ) , yasser article in kitabat Agency Press. الربيع العربى وصناعه الطاغيه , yasser article in kitabat Agency Press. is the founder of the April 6 Youth Movement Democratic Front in Alexandria as well as a blogger, journalist, and a prominent participant in the anti-Mubarak demonstrations in Egypt in 2011 (born 1 January 1978 in Cairo) ==Political activism== He was a protester with the Egyptian opposition movement KefayaKefaya: The origins of Mubarak's downfall. on April 6, 2008. He joined the April 6 movement front in Alexandria in 2010. He was active during the 2011 Egyptian revolution and its aftermath. Blogging was one of the means used to bring down the Mubarak regime. Egypt was listed by the Committee to Protect Journalists as one of the ten worst countries to be a blogger in 2009. Aldden was opposed to the Mubarak regime using a blog, established in 2006. In July 2013, a military coup tv ontv chanel, Reasons a split April 6 Alexandria. alwafd news, article about yasser in alwafd newspaper. استقالة من المصريين الاحرار, moheet agancy press article about yasser. اليوم السابع استقالة ياسر شمس من المصريين الاحرار, youm7 newspaper article about yasser . نص الاستقالة وكالة الاخبار العربية , arab news agancy article about yasser . alahram gate, alahram gate article about yasser. Presidential election, alahram gate article about yasser Presidential election . akhbark, alahram gate article about yasser Presidential election akhbark. removed Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi from office. Despite political and ideological disputes between Aldden and the Muslim Brotherhood, he rejected the coup and consequently in 2013 he traveled out of Egypt. He now states that he can't return to the country, and has been placed on airport watchlists. In summer 2011 after differences arose in the April 6 Youth Movement, leaders of the movement announced they would transform it into a NGO or a foundation on its anniversary. On August 8, 2011, Aldden split with a group of 6 April Youth Movement members in Alexandria and established the April 6 Youth Movement Democratic Front, leaving Ahmed Maher's group == See also == ;Political activists * Ahmed Maher * Israa Abdel Fattah * Malalai Anaa * Wael Ghonim * Civil resistance * Nonviolent resistance * List of women who sparked a revolution ==References== ==External links== * Category:1978 births Category:Living people Category:Egyptian dissidents Category:People of the Egyptian revolution of 2011 Category:Egyptian democracy activists Category:Members of the Egyptian Constituent Assembly of 2012