Yellowstone National Park (part) was a former county-equivalent in southwestern Montana, a state in the northwestern United States. ==Geography== In 1872, Yellowstone National Park became the first national park in the United States and widely considered the first national park in the world. In 1887, the portion of Yellowstone National Park in Montana was excluded from the jurisdiction of Park County and Gallatin County. Thus, it became a non- county area. Its boundaries were the same as the Montana section of Yellowstone National Park, which is primarily within Wyoming. In 1929, the non-county area expanded to reflect Yellowstone's extended boundaries in Montana. In 1932, the non-county area expanded once again to include Yellowstone's annexation of the Game Ranch in what is now Park County. At its largest, the county-equivalent's total area was , with of land and of water. On November 7, 1978, voters in Park County and Gallatin County approved the area's dissolution into the two original counties. Gallatin County acquired of land area and of water area, whereas Park County acquired of land area and of water area. ===Census data=== The United States Census Bureau did not adjust for the county-equivalent's dissolution until 1997, 19 years after the reapportionment into two counties. The transferred areas were then designated by the Census Bureau as Census Tract 14 in Gallatin County, and Census Tract 6 in Park County.|1400000US30067000600 United States Census Bureau.gov: Census Tract 14, Gallatin County; Census Tract 6, Park County, Montana The designations did not change the area's status as part of Yellowstone National Park. In the 1990 census, the last one before the Census Bureau reapportionment, the county-equivalent had a population of 52 persons. In the 2000 census, the combined population of Tracts 6 and 14 had grown to 61 persons. ==See also== * * ==References== Category:Montana counties Category:Geography of Gallatin County, Montana Category:Geography of Park County, Montana Category:Yellowstone National Park Category:1978 disestablishments in Montana Category:Montana articles lacking sources